\chapter*{Preface}
\setheader{Preface}

Every thesis has a story behind that involves much more people than the mere
author whose name is on the cover. This book is the conclusion of four years of
work in the MoNOS group at the physics institute in Leiden where I have focused
into the study of single gold nanorod luminescence and its possible applications. 

The project was framed into a larger collaboration aimed at utilizing single
gold nanorods as labels in the nucleus of cells. My part in the collaboration
was the understanding of the luminescence of single gold nanorods, crucial for
the imaging in living cells. Even if my work was not biophysical, I always kept
an eye into the biological applications of my research.

A Friday afternoon idea, triggered by postdoc Saumya Khatua evolved into what
now is Chapter \ref{ch:KCN} of this book. He asked me if it was possible to
monitor the etching process of gold by cyanide ions in single gold
nanoparticles. The first trial showed already something interesting: single
particles on glass were behaving completely different than in bulk suspension.
More importantly, to answer the question it was clear that we needed better
software to control the setup.

Ferry Kruidenberg, a bachelor student at the time, joined the group to help
develop the software even further. He designed the core layout of the program
and the first graphical user interface. Together we learned about version
control, instrumentation and programming patterns. Simultaneously a master
student, Irina Komen, joined the group to start working on an optical tweezer.
Together we managed to obtain photothermal signal from single nanoparticles
while being trapped in water and glycerol. We also started to look into
fluorescence enhancement of a dye in the vicinity of the rod, while away from
any other surface and avoiding sticking.

Even if the results on the optical tweezer didn't fit into this thesis, while
characterizing the emission from different nanoparticles an interesting
phenomenon appeared: anti-Stokes emission. We were initially puzzled by the fact
that nanorods can emit light at higher energies than the irradiation energy.
This is however not a strange phenomenon considering that the nanoparticles get
hot while being irradiated and therefore there is an excess of energy that can
be converted into light emission at shorter wavelengths.

Anti-Stokes luminescence opened the door to two different approaches. Firstly it
was possible to exploit the emission at shorter wavelengths to suppress the
background when imaging in biological conditions. Cells are known to fluoresce
under laser irradiation and therefore dim emitters such as small nanoparticles
are hard to distinguish from the background. After discussing with Veer Keizer,
a PhD candidate in biology belonging to the same project, we embarked into the
exploitation of the anti-Stokes emission for imaging. These ideas lead to
Chapter \ref{ch:Imaging} and its publication in the Biophysical Journal. It was
very well received by the reviewers, even qualifying the findings of a ``very
important breakthrough''.

However, there was more in the anti-Stokes emission than its mere application
to imaging. If the emission depends on temperature, it can be used as a
thermometer. Characterizing the spectral emission from nanoparticles proved to
be more challenging than initially planned. Optimizing each part of the setup
for improving the collection efficiency included replacing beam splitters for
electronically controlled flipping mirrors. Carefully selecting the
employed optical filters and optimizing the entrance slit of the spectrometer.

To prove the usefulness of the method, the measurements were performed in a
temperature variable flow cell. An air spaced objective was needed to avoid
altering the temperature of the observed area, which in turn lowered the
collection efficiency. At higher temperatures (around $60\degree$) the setup
drifts several micrometers and therefore an accurate control of temperature and
a proper tracking of the particles is needed. After several mistakes, a big
volume of preliminary data and measurements spanning over $12$ consecutive
hours, Chapter \ref{ch:AntiStokes} was finalized. 

Chapter \ref{ch:AntiStokes} shows that it is indeed possible to determine the
absolute temperature of single nanoparticles just by measuring their anti-Stokes
spectrum. The method does not require any from of ad-hoc calibration and can be
easily implemented in any confocal microscope coupled with a spectrometer. These
findings can have a major impact in photothermal therapy and in material
sciences, where the question of the temperature reached by the particles has
been opened for more than $20$ years. Testing the method in real situations is
the next logical step but was outside the time frame of the thesis.

With the experience built on the anti-Stokes luminescence, characterizing the
scattering of single gold nanoparticles at different temperatures did not prove
to be particularly challenging. Since the first inception of the computer
software until the last version, that allowed to acquire all the data in Chapter
\ref{ch:Damping} almost $4$ years had passed. 

This work summarizes a lot of effort by a lot of people. It neglects all the
failed experiments and frustrations. It is important to remind that failure is
only a relative measure; while we learn something either of nature or of
ourselves, we are being successful. 

This book is dedicated to all who have supported me through the years even if
not explicitly mentioned.

\begin{flushright}
{\makeatletter\itshape
    \@firstname\ \@lastname \\
    Leiden, January 2016
\makeatother}
\end{flushright}

