\chapter{Plasmon damping as a function of temperature}
\label{ch:Damping}

\begin{abstract}
The fundamental property of metallic nanoparticles is the presence of a
localized surface plasmon resonance. This resonance gives rise to very
intriguing and useful properties such as sub-wavelength field confinement,
increase in the efficiency of creation of hot carriers, large absorption and
scattering cross sections. In this work we show that the plasmon resonance width
increases linearly with temperature in the range from $293\K$ to $350\K$. This
can be used to measure temperature employing far field optics and can have many
applications in different fields.
\end{abstract}

\newpage


\section{Introduction}
\dropcap{M}{easuring} temperature at the nanoscale is one of the main open
challenges in biology\cite{Yang2011a}, specially when focused into the promising fields of
photothermal\cite{Huang2006a,Hirsch2003} and photodynamic
therapy\cite{West2003}. The first method normally employs small nanoparticles to
efficiently convert irradiation energy into heat in very localized
environments\cite{Ma2014a}, thus making it possible to address specific
cells\cite{Hirsch2003,Huang2008}. The latter employs the nanoparticles as small
antennas, utilizing the enhanced near field to produce singlet oxygen that in
turn will induce cell apoptosis\cite{Hone2002} or to induce drug
delivery after irradiation\cite{Cheng2008}.

Successfully designing and implementing new therapies requires not only a
careful understanding of the mechanisms involved, but also needs tools to
measure and validate the hypotheses. For instance, little is reported in
literature regarding the critical temperatures needed for inducing cell
death\cite{Huang2006a}. Much less is reported regarding the effect of a single
nanoparticle in or in the vicinity of a cell.

Measuring temperature in cells has been recently subject to debate, mainly
because measurements contradict the expected thermodynamic
values\cite{Tanimoto2016,Donner2013,Yang2011a}. Therefore new
techniques that can shine light into these matters are very valuable. Moreover
these techniques should be easy to implement in existing setups and ideally
should not interfere with the environment to be measured.

Biologically relevant questions however are not the only open concerns regarding
temperature at the nanoscale. For instance the temperature of a nanoparticle in
an optical tweezer can be estimated from models\cite{Ruijgrok2011a} or by
indirect measurements. Two different approaches include looking at the
rotational diffusion coefficient\cite{Trojek2012} or by seeing
changes in a lipid bilayer standing in the vicinity\cite{Ma2014a,Urban2009}.
These methods are specific to some experiments and can't be easily generalized.

The mentioned therapies are not the only research areas where nanoparticles have
become very promising tools. In particular gold nanoparticles have been
successfully employed as biosensors\cite{Zijlstra2012,Beuwer2015},
labels\cite{Spillane2014,Conde2013}, nanoantennas\cite{Schuller2010b,Leduc2013}
and are currently under investigation for solar energy
conversion\cite{Catchpole2008}. The main property for such broad range of
applications resides in the presence of a localized surface plasmon resonance
(LSPR) that strongly depends on the shape of the particles\cite{Zijlstra2011}.
Normally this resonance will lie between $2.34\eV$ ($530\nm$) for spheres and in 
the near infrared for more elongated particles.

The plasmon resonance on one hand is responsible for high electromagnetic field
enhancements near tips or protrusions\cite{Beversluis2003a,Mohamed2000}.
Because of this, nanoparticles currently are employed as nanometer-sized
antennas useful both for Raman scattering (SERS)\cite{Sivapalan2013} and also for
enhanced fluorescence\cite{Yuan2013,Khatua2014} experiments. On the other hand,
the plasmon resonance energy is highly sensitive to the refractive
index\cite{Prasad2015} of the medium surrounding the particles. This phenomenon
is exploited for instance in nanosensors that rely in minute changes in the
plasmon resonance to detect down to single molecules\cite{Zijlstra2012}.

The energy (or equivalently the wavelength) of the resonance is not the only
useful parameter for sensing applications. The resonance's width is also
dependent on surrounding conditions\cite{Liu2009b,Konrad2013} and therefore can
be exploited. In this work we propose the use of the FWHM of the resonance as a
parameter to measure temperature changes of the immersion medium. In order to
achieve a better understanding of the phenomenon it is important to determine
the different parameters that explain the resonance's linewidth of the plasmon.

In literature the main mechanisms involved in the description of the damping of
the plasmon resonance are electron-phonon scattering, electron-surface
scattering, radiative damping and electron-electron
scattering\cite{Sonnichsen2002,Novo2006,Hu2008}.
Interband damping can be neglected if the resonance energies are low enough,
which is the case for the nanorods we studied. Each one of the mentioned terms
contributes additively to the total plasmon damping; electron-phonon scattering
however is the only one that shows a strong dependence on
temperature\cite{Liu2009b,Konrad2013}.
From the Debye model of phonons and a Fermi distribution of the conduction
electrons it is possible to calculate the damping term attributed to
electron-phonon interaction $\Gamma_{\textrm{e-ph}}$ as\cite{McKay1976},
\begin{equation}\label{eqn:broad1}
\Gamma_{\textrm{e-ph}} = 
\frac{\hbar}{\tau_0} \left[ \frac{2}{5}+4 \left( \frac{T}{\Theta_D} \right)^5
\int_0^{\Theta_D/T} \frac{z^4}{e^z - 1}\,\textrm{dz} \right]
\end{equation}

where $\tau_0 = 30\fs$\cite{Liu2009b}, $\Theta_D = 170\K$\cite{Link1999b}.  It
is important to note that this equation is valid in the case $T<\Theta_D$, in
which mostly acoustic phonon modes are occupied. For temperatures $T>\Theta_D$
and by following a simple model for metals it is possible to simplify eqn.
\ref{eqn:broad1} into\cite{Kittel1996}
\begin{equation}\label{eqn:broad2}
\Gamma_{\textrm{e-ph}} = \lambda\frac{k_\textrm{B}T}{\hbar}
\end{equation}
where $\lambda$ is a constant depending on the metal, and $k_\textrm{B}$ is
Boltzmann's constant. Equations \ref{eqn:broad1} and \ref{eqn:broad2} are
derived in the limit $E_f \gg \hbar\omega \gg k_\textrm{B}T$, where
$\hbar\omega$ is the plasmon resonance energy. For gold, $E_f = 5.53\eV$, and at
room temperature $k_\textrm{B}T=0.026\eV$. For nanoparticles with resonances at around $1.91\eV$ as the ones employed in this work, both
conditions are satisfied. The coefficient $\lambda$ is assumed to be a constant
of the metal, but it could also be an intrinsic property of each particle.

Previous work done at low temperatures on bulk gold\cite{McKay1976}, gold
nanorods\cite{Konrad2013} and gold bipyramids\cite{Liu2009b} showed a good
agreement of the model in equation \ref{eqn:broad1} with the experimental
results. On average it was found that the electron-phonon damping increases with
a rate of $0.1\meV/\K$ for temperatures above the Debye temperature,
independently of the geometry. Nanorods or bipyramids normally have plasmon
resonances below $2\eV$ and therefore interband damping mechanisms can be
discarded.
\cite{Sundararaman2014,AlejandroManjavacasJunG.LiuVikramKulkarni2014}

\begin{figure}[tp] \centering
\includegraphics[width=78mm]{Chapters/05_WhiteLight/Figures/01_Spectra_Example/01_Spectra_Example.png}
\caption{Normalized scattering spectra of a single gold nanorod at $293\K$ and
at $333\K$ with corresponding lorentzian fits. The offset between the curves is for
clarity. The FWHM increases by $3.6\meV$ upon a temperature change of $40\K$.
The inset shows a SEM image of some nanorods from the same batch. The scale bar
is $50\nm$.}
	\label{fig:scattering_spectra}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{fig:scattering_spectra} shows white light scattering spectra of a single
gold nanorod at $293\K$ and $333\K$ with the corresponding lorentzian fits. The
plasmonic resonance centered around $1.857\eV$ is clearly visible. The FWHM of
the fit at $333\K$ is $3.6\meV$ larger than at $293\K$; this increase in width
is of about $3\%$ over a $40\K$ temperature change. The inset of the figure
shows a SEM image of a cluster of the typical particles employed in this work.

Measuring the plasmonic resonance of single gold nanorods can be achieved not
only by detecting white light scattering spectra but also by exciting their
luminescence\cite{Konrad2013}. It has to be kept in mind, however, that
measuring scattering spectra benefits from the enhanced cross section at the
resonant wavelengths without being affected by the very low quantum yield of the
luminescence\cite{Yorulmaz2012}. This in turn will allow us to use much lower
excitation powers and shorter acquisition times.

\section{Experimental Method}

The experiments were performed in a home-built confocal microscope. The samples
were mounted on a flow cell that allowed to raise the temperature of the
medium up to $60\degree$. A dry objective (Olympus $60\times$ NA$0.9$) was
employed to avoid the presence of a heat sink close to the observed area. To
acquire white light scattering spectra the particles were immersed in index
matching oil, therefore achieving a dark-field configuration without changes to
the optics. Nanorods with average dimensions $20\nm\times50\nm$, as shown in the
inset of fig. \ref{fig:scattering_spectra} were spin coated on top of a clean
coverslip. As a result, the number of dimers or clusters is below $1\%$ of the
observed diffraction-limited bright spots.

Spectra were recorded with an Acton $500\textrm{-i}$ spectrometer. Exposure
times were on average of two seconds. This short time was possible because the
collected scattered intensity is of the order of $10^5$ counts per second with a
laser-driven white light source (Energetiq).

Two different kinds of experiments were performed. Firstly spectra of a single
nanorod were acquired continuously while varying the temperature in cycles, as
shown in Figure \ref{fig:temp-cycle}. From $19\degree$ the temperature was
increased to $60\degree$ and then freely cooled down. For the first analyzed
particle the procedure was repeated three times in order to study fluctuations
in the results given by the higher temperatures. Two more particles were studied
in the same manner, but each was subject to one thermal cycle only. In every
case, after each spectrum a background was recorded in the vicinity of the particle.
 
Secondly many particles were analyzed to improve the statistics of the results.
In this set of experiments, each particle's spectrum was acquired consecutively.
Also backgrounds in different regions of the sample were recorded. After the
iteration on all particles was finished, the temperature was changed to a fixed
value and the operation was repeated. In this way we have recorded the
scattering spectrum of more than $200$ particles at $9$ different temperatures
ranging from $19\degree$ to $58\degree$. The first $5$ measurements were done
while increasing the temperature, while the last $4$ were done when cooling down
to room temperature.

\begin{figure}[tp] \centering
\includegraphics[width=74.2mm]{Chapters/05_WhiteLight/Figures/Supplementary/01_Temp_Cycle/01_Temp_Cycle.png}
\caption{Example of the temperature cycle employed for studying a single gold
nanorod. A spectra of the particle and of the background were acquired in
intervals of approximately $10\s$}
	\label{fig:temp-cycle}
\end{figure}

In order to compensate for the drift of the setup while changing the
temperature, a special computer program to control the setup was written. In the
first set of experiments, it continuously refocused on the studied particle and
triggered the spectrometer. The same program monitored and recorded the
temperature of the flow-cell by measuring the resistance of a previously
calibrated Pt$100$ thermometer, placed $1\mm$ away from the observed area. Only
in the first cycle both the warming up and cooling down were done in steps, as
can be seen in the Fig. \ref{fig:temp-cycle}, in order to slowly test the
procedure.

In the second experiment, a reference particle was used for compensating the
drift while changing temperature; the relative positions of the other particles
were calculated accordingly. In every case an automatic refocusing procedure was
applied before triggering the spectrometer, ensuring the correct positioning of
the desired particle in the center of the beam. With this procedure,
approximately $80$ particles can be studied at $9$ different temperatures in
under $6$ hours. Measuring the local temperature in the vicinity of the
particles is important since the PID loop used to control the flow-cell
temperature can have drifts of up to $4\degree$.

\section{Results}
\begin{figure}[tp] \centering
\includegraphics[width=80mm]{Chapters/05_WhiteLight/Figures/02_One_Pcle/02_One_Pcle.png}
\caption{Plasmon width for one particle at varying temperatures. From top to
bottom, each plot represents a thermal cycle, going from room temperature to
$60\degree$ (red circles) and cooling down afterwards (blue crosses). It can be
seen that after the second cycle the width increases reproducibly with
temperature.}
	\label{fig:one_pcle}
\end{figure}

The particle shown in Figure \ref{fig:scattering_spectra} was analyzed while
continuously changing the temperature of the flow cell as described earlier.
Figure \ref{fig:one_pcle} shows the FWHM (full width at half maximum) of the
plasmon resonance as a function of temperature. Each row in the figure
corresponds to every temperature cycle in Fig. \ref{fig:temp-cycle}, the first
cycle on top and the last at the bottom. In every plot, the red dots show the
part of the cycle with an increasing temperature. The blue crosses show the
results when cooling down to room temperature.

In Fig. \ref{fig:one_pcle} it is possible to observe that during the first cycle
there is a linear relationship between the plasmon resonance's width and
temperature. In this cycle the plasmon broadens at a rate of $0.34\meV/\K$.
During the second cycle the broadening of the resonance is slightly less
pronounced, at a rate of $0.23\meV/\K$. During the third cycle the broadening of
the plasmon shows a rate of $0.15\meV/K$. The results of the linear fittings of
the FWHM of the plasmon while changing temperature are summarized in table
\ref{table-results}. The values correspond to the slope of the line for the
increasing and the decreasing part of the cycle separately. The cooling down
part of the third cycle gives a measured rate of $0.09\meV/\K$. This value is in
good agreement with the expected broadening rate of $0.1\meV/\K$ reported
earlier\cite{Liu2009b,Konrad2013} and expected from bulk gold measurements.

\begin{figure}[tp] \centering
\includegraphics[width=78.2mm]{Chapters/05_WhiteLight/Figures/02_One_Pcle/02_One_Pcle_02.png}
\caption{Resonance position for one particle at varying temperatures. From top
to bottom, each plot represents a thermal cycle, going from room temperature to
$60\degree$ (red circles) and cooling down afterwards (blue crosses). It can be
seen that after the second cycle there is no variation of the plasmon resonance
position, thus no reshaping of the particle.}
	\label{fig:one_pcle_spr}
\end{figure}

However the resonance damping rate is not the only parameter changing with
temperature. Figure \ref{fig:one_pcle_spr} shows that the resonance energy also
shifts when changing the temperature of the immersion oil. The resonance goes
from $1.869\eV$ at room temperature to $1.877\eV$ at $58\degree$. More
strikingly, when cooling down the resonance energy diminishes to $1.862\eV$. The
second cycle presents the same behavior but much less pronounced than during
the first one. In the third cycle the resonance does not depend on temperature
and is stable around $1.856\eV$, indicating the the rods don't reshape
significantly in our conditions.

Normally plasmon shifts are related to changes in the refractive index of the
medium surrounding the nanoparticles. This phenomenon is used, for instance, in
photothermal imaging\cite{Berciaud2006,Gaiduk2010b} or in
biosensors\cite{Zijlstra2012} as described in the Introduction. The fact that in
the first cycle there is a non-reversible plasmon shift suggests that either the
medium or the surface of the particle (or both) changed in a permanent way after
reaching higher temperatures. This can be due to a deterioration of the
immersion oil, or to an adsorption/desorption of molecules from the particle's
surface, effectively changing the refractive index in the surroundings of the
nanorod. Discriminating these two mechanisms would require further studies that
are out of the scope of this work. 

Thermal reshaping of the nanoparticles can be ruled out since it would have
induced a blue-shift of the resonance\cite{Liu2009,Horiguchi2008}, while we
observe an overall red-shift. Moreover, the temperatures reached in this work
are much lower than those needed for observing changes in shape of the nanorods.
However, it is important to note that the plasmon broadening still occurs in the
third temperature cycle when no resonance shift is observed. Therefore the
broadening is not caused by changes in the medium but by intrinsic properties of
the nanoparticles, as proposed in the introduction.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{ c | c c || c | c | c}
  Cycle & B$_i$(meV/K) & B$_d$(meV/K) & Particle & B$_i$(meV/K) & B$_d$(meV/K)\\
  \hline
  1 & 0.34 & 0.23 & 2 & 0.27 & 0.23\\
  2 & 0.23 & 0.16 & 3 & 0.08 & 0.02\\
  3 & 0.15 & 0.09 & & \\

\end{tabular}
  \caption{Summary of the results of the linear fittings for particles 1 (on
  the left). 2 and 3 (on the right). B$_i$ and B$_d$ are the results for the
  \textit{i}ncreasing and \textit{d}ecreasing part of the temperature
  cycles.}\label{table-results}
\end{table}

%Figure \ref{fig:one_pcle} shows that the plasmon broadening is a consistent
%parameter for extracting the relative temperature change of the surrounding
%medium. It has to be kept in mind that the temperatures reached are too low for
%inducing a reshaping of the particles, and the white light source
%employed is not intense enough for light-induced reshaping. Moreover thermal
%reshaping of particles induces a blue shift of the resonance (particles go from
%elongated shapes to spheres) while we observed a shift towards lower energies.

\begin{figure}[tp] \centering 
\includegraphics[width=8cm]{Chapters/05_WhiteLight/Figures/03_Two_Pcles/03_Two_Pcles.png}
\caption{Plasmon width for two particles, 
going from room temperature to $60\degree$ (red circles) and cooling down
afterwards (blue crosses). Both particles show a broadening of the plasmon
proportional to temperature, but the rates are different.}	
\label{fig:two_pcles}
\end{figure}

We performed the same experiment on two more particles. The measurements were
carried on right after the third cycle of particle $1$ in order to preserve the
same experimental conditions and to avoid possible changes in the immersion oil
as explained earlier. The surface plasmon resonance of both particles did not
shift during their temperature cycles. This shows that the changes induced
either on the surface of the particle or of the immersion oil at higher
temperatures have a persistence of at least few hours.

The FWHM of the resonances of these two particles are shown in Figure
\ref{fig:two_pcles}. The slopes of every fit are summarized in table
\ref{table-results} on the right columns. Particle $2$ shows a broadening rate
higher than particle $1$ while particle $3$ shows a rate lower than expected.
The heterogeneity in nanorod samples normally accounts for large variations in
the observables. For instance quantum yield measurements\cite{Yorulmaz2012} or
the rate of chemical etching\cite{Carattino2016} of the surface of the particles
show a broad distribution of values. To further investigate the differences
between particles and to study if there is a relationship between the broadening
rates and the plasmon resonance, we performed the same analysis on $220$
different particles.

\begin{figure}[tp] \centering
\includegraphics[width=8cm]{Chapters/05_WhiteLight/Figures/04_Many_Pcles/04_Many_Particles.png}
\caption{Plasmon broadening rate as a function of initial resonance position.
Main panel shows the results for $220$ different nanorods. Panel (i) is the histogram
of the distribution of resonance energies found. Panel (ii) shows the
distribution of broadening rates for all the particles and its fit by a gaussian
as a solid red curve. Panel (iii) shows an example of the fitting for one
particle; red squares correspond to increasing temperatures while blue crosses
correspond to the decreasing.}
		\label{fig:many-pcles}
\end{figure}

As described earlier, we acquired the scattering spectrum of several particles
at different temperatures. The top right panel Figure \ref{fig:many-pcles} shows
the result of the procedure for one of the particles as en example. The red
squares show the FWHM of the plasmon resonance while increasing the
temperature and the blue crosses correspond to the cooling down to room
temperature. The linear fits have slopes of $0.14\meV/\K$ and $0.13\meV/\K$
respectively. Compared to the results shown in Figs. \ref{fig:one_pcle} and
\ref{fig:two_pcles}, spectra were not acquired continuously but after the
temperature was stabilized at a certain value. At each temperature, spectra
of several nanorods were acquired.

From the slopes of the linear fits of all the particles analyzed it is possible
to construct the scatter plot of broadening rates and resonance energies for all
the nanoparticles. This is shown in the bottom left panel of Figure
\ref{fig:many-pcles}. The particles analyzed had resonances varying from
$1.6\eV$ to $2\eV$, and the distribution of energies is shown in the top left
histogram of Fig.\ref{fig:many-pcles}. The most frequent resonance is around
$1.81\eV$. The distribution of resonance energies is also an indication of the
dispersion of shapes of the samples and is inherent to wet chemical synthesis
methods.

The broadening rates of the $220$ studied particles are summarized in the
histogram at the bottom right in fig. \ref{fig:many-pcles}. The gaussian fit of
the distribution has the center at $0.08 \meV/\K$ with a standard deviation of
$0.3 \meV/\K$. This is in good agreement with the expected broadening rate of
$0.1\meV/\K$. The measurements were performed after some thermal cycles and no
change in the plasmon resonance energy was observed while increasing or
decreasing the temperature. This implies that the broadening rates differ from
particle to particle because of inherent properties and not because of
differences generated by the immersion oil used. 

From Figure \ref{fig:many-pcles} it is possible to discard any significant
dependence of the plasmon broadening rate on the plasmon's resonance position if
this is kept below the interband transition energy. The model proposed in the
introduction accounts for the broadening of the plasmon in terms of the
electron-phonon coupling in gold and can account for the average behavior
observed. It is important to note, however, that particles with resonances to
the red normally have narrower plasmons\cite{Sonnichsen2002}. Therefore the
sensitivity of the broadening will be higher for particles with lower resonance
energies.

The distribution of rates shown in Fig. \ref{fig:many-pcles} also includes
particles that show a narrowing of the plasmon resonance while the temperature
increases. Approximately $27\%$ of the studied nanorods present a negative
broadening rate. The model of electron-phonon coupling proposed in this
work does not account for this phenomenon, nor for the different broadening
rates for different particles. It is possible that the uncertainty in the
determination of the plasmon width is responsible in part for this. The expected
plasmon width change with a temperature increase of $40\K$ is of about
$4\meV$, or $4\%$ of the FWHM of the resonance of the particles. 

\section{Conclusions}
Measuring temperature at the nanoscale is challenging. Available techniques rely
on spectral changes of fluorophores\cite{Chapman1995a} or quantum
dots\cite{Tanimoto2016,Yang2011a}. Here we show that scattering properties of
gold nanoparticles can also be used as temperature sensors. One of the main
advantages is that the scattering cross section of gold nanoparticles is on the
order of $10^3\nm^2$, and therefore the powers needed for measuring the spectrum
as well as the integration times can be low.

Electron-phonon coupling in gold is one of the parameters responsible for the
broad plasmonic resonance of nanoparticles. This is also the only parameter that
depends strongly on temperature and can be modeled with a simple linear relation
for temperatures in the range that we studied, between $293\K$ and $350\K$. It
is therefore expected that the plasmon width depends linearly on temperature as
was shown in this work.

Particles were studied in detail, acquiring continuously spectra while
increasing and decreasing the immersion medium's temperature and showed a
broadening of their resonances with various rates. The electron-phonon coupling
model does not allow us to explain this behavior; however we have also observed
that the resonance energy changes with temperature and a persistent red-shift is
observed. This is attributed to changes in the refractive index of the medium
surrounding the particles, either due to the immersion oil changing in a non
reversible way or to some modification of the surface chemistry of the particles
(for instance because of adsorption of molecules present in the oil). The
plasmon shift however disappears after some thermal cycles, but the plasmon
broadening remains.

In the situation when no resonance shift with increasing or decreasing
temperature is observed, we have investigated the differences in the broadening
rates from particle to particle. Spectra of more than $200$ nanorods were
studied, allowing us to discard a possible relationship of the rates with the
resonance position. It was found that the broadening rates have a distribution
centered around $0.08\meV/\K$, while the value expected from bulk measurements
is $0.1\meV/\K$\cite{McKay1976}. The standard deviation of the distribution of
rates is $0.3\meV/\K$.

The model proposed in this work cannot account for the distribution of rates
observed. However it has to be noted that when working with gold nanoparticles,
the distribution of values of selected quantities can be of up to one order of
magnitude. For example, quantum yield measurements\cite{Yorulmaz2012}, surface
chemistry\cite{Carattino2016}, plasmon induced reactions\cite{Osinkina2013} are
some of the examples of the high variability observed from particle to particle.
This variability also makes single-particle studies important since many of the
phenomena can be hidden in bulk measurements\cite{Link1999b}.

With the measured average broadening rate, reaching sensitivities of $1\K$ imply
detecting changes in the plasmon width of $0.08\meV$, less than $0.1\%$ of the
total width. The error in the fitting of the scattering spectrum is mainly given
by the amount of light collected. Longer exposure times can lead to lower errors
and therefore higher sensitivities. On the other hand, detecting several
particles at the same time can lead to increasing the temperature sensitivity.
Without any previous calibration, the broadening of the plasmon can be used at
best to detect temperature changes, but not the absolute temperature of the
sample.

\references{Chapters/05_WhiteLight/WhiteLight}
